Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lank.
Joe Clayton is a science fiction and fantasy writer who has a discovery of Donald A. Walheim, publisher of Dahl Books.
Other recent Walheim discoveries are C.J. Sherry and Tannath Lee.
Clayton has published seven novels in the Diadem series and two in the Duel of Sorcery series.
She has also published several short stories.
Clayton began writing only after she was well into her career.
We ask her why she decided to become a writer and why she chose science fiction.
I've been teaching for a number of years.
And I'm also an artist. I draw a lot.
And I was much more interested in painting and drawing for my first years than I was in writing.
But I gradually came to see that while I have a gift for rendering, I can do quite good individual objects.
I don't have any for design.
And I wasn't willing to take the trouble to work for that field.
So I decided to remain in very much an amateur as a painter.
But having drawn that conclusion and being in a situation where I needed to get out,
I was about ready to bang my head against the walls on one of your examples of teacher burnout.
And so I started writing as a way of breaking away from the job I was in.
And science fiction, well, because I've always loved it, because I thought I could write it.
And it is an awful lot of fun making up walls.
Basically, that's it.
Clayton's first novel, published in 1977, was Diadem from the Stars.
She's published six more novels in the series since then.
The protagonist is Eletus, a strange girl from a backward planet who accidentally acquires the Diadem,
an alien artifact which contains the essences and identities of three remarkable humans.
We asked Clayton if she had the entire series planned before she wrote the first novel.
It's like just about every one of the novels that are right.
I know where I'm starting and I know my characters and I know my world, in this case, the series of worlds.
And I know where I'm going, but how I'm going to get there develops.
I don't think I can write any other way.
I mean, it would be boring if I knew everything before I started.
For example, in Star Hunters, one of the secondary leads in that, the woman who was one of the toy, a plaything,
the wife of one of the other secondary leads in the subplots, was only supposed to be in there for about three pages or so.
But I suddenly got very interested in her, or she got me interested in her.
And then she began to take over and she became a very important part of the book, and this was totally, totally unexpected.
During each installment in the Diadem series, Elidas learns more about her past and her quest.
Here Clayton tells us of her plans for Elidas in the series.
In the beginning I meant to have Elidas reach her, find her mother and her family in, oh, about the same as the number of books.
I think there'd be about nine in all.
I just finished one and turned it in.
I think that's the eighth.
And the next one will probably be the last in that particular series, dealing with Elidas as the main character.
Each book, I hope, shows makes Elidas a little bit more aware of who she is and what she really wants, rather than what she thought she wanted.
And in the end, she's going to end up, I hope, satisfied with where she is working and living in that place for a while anyway.
So I knew I was going to have her to find her mother and her mother's world, how I was going to get there.
It depended on the inspiration and the desperation of the moment.
We'll have more on her next show with Joe Clayton.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Joe Clayton's Diadem series comprises seven novels so far.
These are Diadem from the Stars, Lamarcos, Ursud, Maeve, Star Hunters, The Nowhere Hunt, and Ghost Hunt.
Clayton's settings are well done, the action is exciting, and her characters are deep and believable.
In fact, the series is carried by the protagonist, Elidas, who is on a quest to uncover her heritage.
We were curious how the series got started. Did Clayton conceive of Elidas or the Diadem first?
Well, Elidas was the character first to growl.
Actually, the first image that hit me was that first page of the first book.
I just got this feeling for something suddenly and breaking into the world that she knew.
The crash of the ship was the thief.
He was also one of the first characters that came up with. I could see him in his flight.
Well, I see these things. Once I get to know them, I'm a very visual person.
There's this little movie screen in the front of my head that goes through.
But those are the things that came first of all.
The picture of the thief in flight, I didn't know what he had stolen.
The crashing on the wall, I didn't know what that crash meant.
And slowly building up complications. I like complications.
When Warren reads the Diadem series sequentially, he sees the continuing evolution of Clayton's writing style.
Yes. For instance, the first novel carefully explains the concept of the Diadem.
The alien artifact containing three trapped human spirits. It also covers how Elidas learned to draw power from it.
But in the later novels, the Diadem more or less takes a backseat to other issues. Here Clayton comments.
I also am thinking of the series as my workshop in education and writing.
And the concepts I might have had in the beginning. I'm not going to stick with them.
I'll modify the vastness areas. I learned more about my craft.
More and more, in the last books, I hope the character of the people trapped in the Diadem.
Is coming through. And as they come out, achieve re-embodied, or whatever you want to call it.
They become more and more real to me and more important than the Diadem itself.
Elidas is a very tough, strong character. This happened partly because of Clayton's experience in dealing with teenagers as a teacher.
She consequently had to place Elidas in situations where even her powers would be tested.
I said before that I was in a situation where I was really banging my head against the wall.
I was teaching English, you know, and while this is very important, there were so many things happening to my kids.
I guess I got too involved with them. That I was totally helpless to alleviate things that, you know,
the pressures on them, the wounds that they got from them, the world around them.
That I was just absolutely useless in helping them live through.
I created perhaps a character that was in the end a little bit too powerful, too able to go to a world magic or way out of things.
So I had to create problems for her and help her come to an understanding of the limitations of power.
Which I guess is one of the themes in what I'm writing.
More on our next show with Joe Clayton.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show is a production of the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lange.
Joe Clayton has written seven Science Fiction novels in the Diadem series.
She has plans for writing two more.
But Clayton has also written two novels so far in the Duel of Sorcery series, which is Fantasy.
These novels are Moon Gather and Moon Scatter.
We asked Clayton why she decided to write Fantasy amidst writing all that science fiction.
Here she tells us about the rather unique source of inspiration.
This cockroach came crawling down the side of the house and it sat there and it looked at me.
Your first reaction with a cockroach is smash it.
But I decided to sit there and look at it.
It's really interesting, the creature.
Actually it's pretty in its way.
Very nice lines, very bright black eyes, little alert.
And it just sat there and we looked at each other for a while.
So I decided to write a story about a cockroach.
And I decided that it's going to be Fantasy.
It just seemed to fit in Fantasy.
So that cockroach ended up, I believe, with about ten pages out of 300 or something like that.
But he was in there.
He was by inspiration.
And I don't know, he just felt like writing Fantasy.
It wasn't any great momentous decision.
It's just the way it turned out.
The Cockroach passage, by the way, is in the first novel in the series, Moon Gather.
Sometimes Fantasy is criticized as being someone easier to write than Science Fiction because there are no rules to break.
Right, Science Fiction takes place in the world of consistent logic.
Whereas in Fantasy one can resort to magic when things appear hopeless.
If clumsily handled, such antics can irritate the reader.
Clayton told us, though, that she believes well-written Fantasy follows rules.
I am one of those who really believes that there are rules to magic.
I don't believe in magic at all, but it's fun to play with.
It's sort of an extension of all the psionics, which is probably present is not a science either.
Might be, but many people are skeptical about that.
But I can't...
It is just the same thing in the sense that writing Science Fiction,
only you write in other terms the same kind of rulekeeping.
The societies, you can play with visual things and possibilities in a different way.
It's not more at least in Science Fiction, if you do it properly, I think.
It just has a different set of assumptions.
And it's fun to play with those assumptions.
So, Fantasy or Science Fiction, Joe Clayton's carefully crafted work is worth reading.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show
is a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
So, stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on Science Fiction and Fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction is a genre which invites writers to use a wide variety of writing styles.
One writer who recently emerged with a very distinctive style is Anne Maxwell,
whose first novel, Change, was published in 1975.
We asked Maxwell how she decided to become a writer.
My husband was working overnight since he reported in Riverside, California.
I had one, my son at that point was about a year and a half, two years old.
I was pregnant with my daughter.
We had absolutely no money and I had read all Science Fiction I could beg, borrow or steal.
I had cleaned out the library, I had cleaned out the youth bookstores
and it got to the point that there were no more stories of Science Fiction that I wanted to read.
Nobody was writing exactly what I wanted to read.
I decided that I would write it myself and that's what I did.
Maxwell's multi-layered complex style is best seen in her series of four loosely connected novels,
The Singer Enigma, A Dead God Dancing, Name of a Shadow, and Jaws of Minx.
Set in the far future, these novels feature a common known universe governed by a body called the Concord.
The novels don't share common characters though.
We wondered if Maxwell anticipated writing a series when she began the first novel, The Singer Enigma.
I decided that it had been fun to write a book with Earth as a base for a first book.
But I truly wanted the freedom that would come from not having the Earth as we know it now in the book
and therefore I had to invent a system and systems do, you know, people do tend toward hierarchy and governments
and so I thought about those sorts of things for a while until I created a framework within which I could create different cultures
that would yet be comprehensible through the larger framework in this case of Concord.
It was a great deal of fun, a great Englishful play to sit there and try to figure out how people who are radically different
might find ways to get along and that in essence was what the Concord was, the soul and the strength against the undeclared war, that sort of thing.
I at that time did not envision writing a series with continuing characters but I did envision writing more books within that universe.
Maxwell treats male-female relationships in great depth, not only in this series but in her other works, both in science fiction and out.
All our novels feature relationships between men and women of strong character. Here Maxwell comments.
Yes, it always has. I think that two strong people, a man and a woman together, can create possibilities that neither alone would have.
This is not two weak people holding each other up. This is two strong people using relationships as a springboard to other things.
Yes, this is such a deeply held belief on my part that it's sort of like pointing out that there's oxygen in the air to me.
Now I know other people don't feel like that. This is simply one of my beliefs and it is irrevocable.
It should be in all of my books no matter what they are.
This series also features telepathic communications among various characters.
An interesting mechanical point is that the telepathic conversations are punctuated with asterisks rather than with italics or quotation marks, except in the last novel of Jaws of Manx.
We asked Maxwell if this was her publisher's idea.
Oh, I wanted to do that. In fact, I did that up until Signet NIL and then Jaws of Manx came out and it was italicized instead of asterisk, which came as a surprise to me because it was submitted in asterisk.
At that point there was no way to object. It was a style change made by the house. My contract and I agreed that I see all such changes before they occur.
But at that point, I have stuck with it because it is the style of the house and the break is amazing.
But I did leave out in a way losing the ability to italicize for emphasis because it is very... you can't use that for telepathy and emphasis.
At least not very often and not get away with it without confusing the reason. That's why I chose the asterisk in the first place to give me greater freedom.
We'll have more with Anne Maxwell on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The first episode of the show was made in the first place.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane and Max will begin a new Science Fiction series with the publication of Fire Dancer in 1982.
Dancers Luck and Dancers Illusion have come out since then.
Unlike Maxwell's other Science Fiction series, this one consists of tightly connected novels.
Maxwell's writing philosophy in the Fire Dancer series is quite different from that she used to write the Concord series.
I'm sure you've noticed the break between, say, Joseph Manx and Fire Dancer.
It's the break not only of the universe that it was written in, but of the intent of the books themselves, Fire Dancer.
I sat down intending to write a full-on, very accessible romp and enjoyed it thoroughly.
And from the response from the readers, I can only say they must have too.
Whereas with the earlier books, the Concord books, they are less accessible, far more multilayered,
and certainly did not attract the larger audience with the Fire Dancer series.
They're just different books.
The Fire Dancer series is built around the relationship between Reba, a Senyan dancer, and her Brynn mentor, Kyrton.
Reba is a young dancer who literally commands energy.
When she dances, the energy streams from her as if it were fire.
Kyrton, who is of an alien species, helps Reba learn to control and modulate her powers.
Reba and Kyrton are among the last of their respective races, and they are attempting in the series to locate other survivors.
Since it's not spelled out in the series, we asked Maxwell to tell us how the relationship between the dancers and the Brynn might have evolved.
They are constructs as the construct in that sense.
In other words, we are talking about a universe in which what we would call a human or whatever you want to call it is not new.
It has evolved independently.
It has evolved with self-force evolution.
It has evolved in other people's labs against their will.
This is not a world in which logic, as we understand it, biology is always going to be followed through.
It is simply a universe in which that which could survive and was created, did, and had.
And when you come to the darkness between the cycles, then you get both a flowering and a weeding out in what can survive that darkness.
The darkness is going to change the form.
In this sense, what we are talking about is the potential for a good telepathy that became realized to the point that it was necessary.
It was a necessary channel for the Brynn and for the dancers who lacked the gifts to come upon them rather all at once.
And lack the ability to control them at first, then you become a situation where you are a symbiont.
But not in the normal physical sense.
They can live separately.
You can fuse it separately.
You can interrelate it and it will lose itself.
They, to be, to reach anything approaching their fullest potential, they must be cared.
However, not all Brynn's and not all Vignasi are dancers and the ones who aren't are the basic key to the restaurant.
There are many unanswered questions remaining after three installments with the Fire Dancer series.
We asked Maxwell if she plans to wrap it up soon.
I must say that I would never in one sense totally resolve the dancer thing.
In other words, even if they do achieve some of Riza's goals, that is a beginning as well as an ending.
If you have a whole new planet of dancers plus the residue of slaves and talents from the planet Lou,
you are going to have a world once again that is dynamic, that evokes sympathy of the past rather than just a moment.
And Maxwell has presented science fiction with two very interesting yet quite different series.
She's certainly a relative to watch.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you for watching.